A CELEBRATION OF
MUSIC AND MEMORIES.
[Captioning sponsored by WGBH]
"( band plays klezmer-style
version of ""Dayenu"" )"
Bikel: PASSOVER HAS ALWAYS BEEN
ONE OF MY FAVORITE HOLIDAYS.
IT'S A TIME FOR SHARING
WHEN FAMILY AND FRIENDS
ACROSS ALL GENERATIONS
SIT DOWN TOGETHER TO
ENJOY THE SEDER DINNER.
WE EAT WONDERFUL FOOD
WE TELL THE STORY OF THE
EXODUS FROM SLAVERY IN EGYPT
"AND MOST OF ALL, WE CELEBRATE
WITH A RICH TRADITION OF MUSIC."
TONIGHT WE'RE GOING TO SHARE
SOME OF THAT TRADITION.
"WE CAN'T QUITE MANAGE ALL OF
THE FOOD, BUT WITH THE HELP"
OF THE NEW ENGLAND CONSERVATORY
OF MUSIC IN BOSTON
WE WILL TRY TO GIVE YOU
A TASTE OF PASSOVER
TRADITIONS AND RECIPES
AND MOST OF ALL... MUSIC.
"( ""Dayenu"" continues )"
( music ends )
( applause )
"HELLO, I'M THEODORE BIKEL."
AND I AM CHASIA SIEGEL.
"Bikel: YOU KNOW, IT'S FUNNY"
THE THINGS THAT STAY WITH
YOU FROM YOUR CHILDHOOD.
ONE OF MY STRONGEST
PASSOVER MEMORIES
IS THE TASTE OF THE SWEET--
OVERLY SWEET-- RED WINE
THAT MY FATHER POURED FOR ME
"AND THE LITTLE SILVER WINE CUP
I DRANK OUT OF, THE BEKHER."
"THERE'S A SONG ABOUT THAT
CUP, THE OLD HEIRLOOM."
"IT SAYS, ""FOR WHOM
SHALL WE DRINK THIS WINE?"
"""LET'S DRINK L'CHAYIM"
"""FOR THE LITTLE JEW
WHO TOILS AWAY HIS DAYS."
"""LET'S EVEN DRINK
TO OUR ENEMIES"
"BUT DON'T LET'S TELL THEM."""
( audience chuckles softly )
"""AND LET'S DRINK TO ALL THOSE"
"WHO HAVE GONE... FROM
OUR LIVES FOREVER."""
"""DER BEKHER""--
""THE WINE CUP."""
( singing in Yiddish ):
( song ends )
"WELCOME OUR MUSICAL
DIRECTOR, HANKUS NETSKY."
( applause )
THOSE CHILDHOOD SEDERS-- IT
STILL FEELS LIKE YESTERDAY.
SOMETIMES I THINK THAT
MUSIC AND FOOD TOGETHER
HAVE ALMOST A MAGICAL ABILITY
TO BIND OUR MEMORIES TO US.
"IT WAS OVER 3,500 YEARS AGO"
THAT THE ISRAELITES WON
THEIR FREEDOM FROM EGYPT.
AND I'M CONVINCED
THAT WE'VE MANAGED
TO KEEP THE PASSOVER STORY
ALIVE OVER ALL THESE YEARS
BECAUSE OF THE WAY
THAT WE HAVE WOVEN IT
INTO THE TRADITIONS
OF THE SEDER DINNER.
"FOR EXAMPLE, FROM THE
TIME THAT THEY ARE SMALL"
WE TEACH OUR CHILDREN TO
ASK FOUR RITUAL QUESTIONS
TO REMIND US ABOUT WHY
THIS NIGHT IS DIFFERENT
FROM ALL OTHER NIGHTS.
"NOW, IN AMERICA,
IT'S DIFFERENT."
IN AMERICA THEY SAY
"""WHY DO I ALWAYS HAVE TO
ASK THE FOUR QUESTIONS?"""
"IN EUROPE A KID WOULD
SAY, ""I WANT TO ASK..."
"I WANT TO ASK THE
FOUR QUESTIONS."""
"AND THEY SAY, ""YOU CAN'T,
YOU'RE NOT THE YOUNGEST."""
TONIGHT WE ARE
PARTICULARLY LUCKY
BECAUSE WE HAVE THE NEW ENGLAND
CONSERVATORY CHILDREN'S CHORUS
TO HELP US REMEMBER.
( applause )
( singing in Hebrew ):
WE'VE BEEN BUSY WORKING
ON A SEDER PLATE ROUND.
IT HAS FOUR PARTS
AND EACH ONE REPRESENTS ONE OF
THE ITEMS ON THE SEDER PLATE.
"THE FIRST ONE IS A
Z'ROAH, THE ROASTED BONE."
"THE SECOND ARE THE
BITTER HERBS, SOMETHING
LIKE HORSERADISH"
REMINDING US THE BITTERNESS
AND HARDSHIP OF SLAVERY.
"THE THIRD IS BEYTZAH,
A ROASTED EGG."
AND THE LAST IS MATZOH.
THE PHARAOH DIDN'T
GIVE THE JEWISH PEOPLE
VERY MUCH TIME TO LEAVE EGYPT
AND THEY COULDN'T WAIT
FOR THEIR BREAD TO RISE
"SO THEY NEEDED TO EAT
UNLEAVENED BREAD, OR MATZOH."
SOUNDS LIKE A GREAT ROUND.
I'VE NEVER HEARD A
ROUND LIKE THAT BEFORE
BUT HOW DOES THAT GO?
Chorus: Z'ROAH MEANS
STRENGTH AND MIGHT
WHICH TAUGHT THE PHARAOH
WHAT WAS WRONG AND RIGHT
Z'ROAH MEANS STRENGTH AND MIGHT
WHICH TAUGHT THE
PHARAOH WHAT WAS RIGHT.
"THE BITTER HERBS,
THE BITTER HERBS"
REMIND US OF THE
TEARS OUR FATHERS SHED
"THE BITTER HERBS,
THE BITTER HERBS"
REMIND US OF THE
TEARS THEY SHED.
"BEYTZAH, BEYTZAH IS
AN OFFERING OF THANKS"
TO GOD ABOVE WE
OFFER OUR THANKS.
THE MATZOH REMINDS US
OF THE GREAT ESCAPE
FROM PHARAOH'S LAND
THE MATZOH REMINDS US
OF THE GREAT ESCAPE
FROM PHARAOH'S LAND.
Z'ROAH MEANS STRENGTH AND MIGHT
WHICH TAUGHT THE PHARAOH
WHAT WAS WRONG AND RIGHT
Partial chorus: Z'ROAH
MEANS STRENGTH AND MIGHT
WHICH TAUGHT THE
PHARAOH WHAT WAS RIGHT.
( more of chorus joins to sing
parts one and two as round )
first three parts as round )
( full chorus singing
all four parts as round )
( holding final
note as round ends )
( applause )
Siegel: PASSOVER
TAKES PREPARATION:
"CLEANING, SCRUBBING,
SEWING AND COOKING."
IT'S ALL A LOT OF HARD WORK.
AND GUESS WHO DOES IT
MOST: THE MEN OR THE WOMEN?
( audience chuckling )
THERE'S A SONG
ABOUT THAT IN LADINO
THE OLD LANGUAGE OF
THE SPANISH JEWS.
"WHAT WITH ALL THE ACTIVITY,
THE HUSTLE AND BUSTLE"
EVERYONE IN A JEWISH
NEIGHBORHOOD KNOWS
"THAT PASSOVER IS AT HAND--
""PESACH A LA MANO."""
"( band plays ""Pesach
a la Mano"" )"
( singing in Ladino ):
( final notes playing )
( applause )
THERE IS A LOT OF WORK TO BE
DONE-- CLEANING AND COOKING--
"BUT IF IT'S A BURDEN,
IT'S A JOYFUL ONE."
SPRING IS HERE.
FAMILY AND FRIENDS GATHER.
AND EVERY SERIOUS
COOK IS CONVINCED
THAT ONLY SHE REALLY KNOWS HOW
TO MAKE THE TRADITIONAL FOODS
SERVED AT A PROPER SEDER.
AND WHAT IS A SEDER
WITHOUT A KNAYDL?
A DUMPLING?
A MATZO BALL?
Bikel: I LIKE MINE
DENSE AND CHEWY.
( loud applause )
I LOVE MINE LARGE
AND FLUFFY AS CLOUDS.
( loud applause )
"NO, NO, NO, NO,
NO... THE HARD ONES."
THAT'S WHAT MY MOTHER MADE.
( applause )
DON'T TELL ME HOW
TO MAKE MATZO BALLS.
"LOOK, I'LL SHOW YOU."
( quiet laughter )
NOW WE'RE COMING
TO THE EDUCATIONAL
PART OF THIS EVENING.
UP TO NOW WAS ENTERTAINMENT.
( laughter )
"OH, THE MATZO BALL WAS CREATED"
"40 YEARS AFTER THE JEWISH
PEOPLE, OR THE ISRAELITES"
LEFT EGYPT.
"ALL THE 40 YEARS IN THE DESERT,
THEY DIDN'T HAVE TO COOK."
EVERYTHING WAS PREPARED.
USED TO GET UP IN THE MORNING
AND THEY FOUND MANNA
WHITE AND FLUFFY.
IT DIDN'T COST THEM A PENNY.
AND THE WOMEN
FORGOT HOW TO COOK.
THAT WAS A WONDERFUL THING.
"AFTER 40 YEARS, THEY
HAD TO MAKE A SEDER"
AND THEY DIDN'T KNOW WHAT TO DO.
WHAT DO YOU COOK?
HOW DO YOU MAKE?
BUT THERE WAS ONE
JEWISH WOMAN THERE.
I KNOW SHE WAS JEWISH--
WHO ELSE WAS GOING TO
THINK ABOUT A MATZO BALL?
OF COURSE SHE WAS JEWISH.
"NOW, I'M GOING TO
TAKE FOUR EGGS."
EVERYTHING HAS BEEN MEASURED.
AND I PUT IT IN HERE.
AND YOU DON'T HAVE
BEAT-- IT'S NOT A CAKE.
YOU HAVE TO JUST
MIX IT UP A LITTLE.
"AND YOU TAKE SALT,
EITHER TO YOUR TASTE"
OR TO YOUR HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE.
( laughter )
AND YOU MIX IT UP A LITTLE.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO MAKE
A BIG TSIMMES OUT OF IT.
( laughter )
I TAKE A HALF A CUP--
INSTEAD OF WATER I
PUT CHICKEN SOUP.
( quiet laughter )
AND I MIX IT UP.
AND NOW I HAVE A PROBLEM.
I ALWAYS USED TO PUT THE THING
THAT YOU'RE NOT SUPPOSED TO.
"I CALL IT SHMALTZ,
OR CHICKEN FAT."
"AND WELL, SHMALTZ IS
NOT EXACTLY A FOOD;"
SHMALTZ IS A WAY OF LIVING.
( loud laughter )
( applause )
BUT BECAUSE WE'RE NOT SUPPOSED
TO HAVE ANY MORE SHMALTZ
"SO I'M GOING TO HAVE A
SUBSTITUTE, AND THAT IS OIL."
"YOU MIX IT IN, A
THIRD OF A CUP OIL."
YOU DON'T HAVE TO MARK IT DOWN.
I'LL GIVE YOU THE
RECIPE AFTERWARDS.
( laughter )
"YOU MIX IT UP, AND THEN
YOU TAKE THE MATZO MEAL."
"NOW, HERE'S A PROBLEM:"
"IF YOU LIKE MATZO
BALL LIKE I DO, FLUFFY"
YOU JUST PUT IN
THREE-QUARTERS OF A CUP
BUT IF YOU WANT A
REAL HARD MATZO BALL
YOU HAVE TO PUT IN A LITTLE
BIT SOFTER THAN CEMENT.
( loud laughter )
AND YOU START MAKING THE
KNAYDLACH VERY NICE AND ROUND.
YOU HAVE TO BE CAREFUL
THEY SHOULD COME OUT
NICE AND BEAUTIFUL
SO THE PEOPLE WILL LIKE THEM.
"YOU SEE, IF IT DOESN'T
COME OUT SO ROUND..."
"YOU SEE ONE THING IS
STICKING OUT, GIVE A
KNACK, YOU DO, YEAH."
YOU DON'T HAVE TO
BE AFRAID OF IT.
IT WON'T HIT YOU BACK.
AND YOU JUST MAKE IT... YOU
SEE-- IT'S ALMOST PERFECT.
AND I PUT IT IN THE HOT WATER.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO
BE ALL THE SAME SIZE.
"THE BIGGER ONES YOU TAKE
FOR YOUR FAMILY, SO..."
( loud laughter )
AND THE SMALLER ONES
YOU CAN GIVE THE GUESTS.
WHAT DO THEY KNOW?
BECAUSE WE ARE DOING
A DEMONSTRATION
I HAVE IT ALL DONE AND ALL READY
SO YOU'LL SEE HOW THE
MATZO BALLS COME OUT.
WE HAVE HOT SOUP
PREPARED FOR YOU
AND YOU HAVE IT RIGHT HERE.
AND THAT IS THE READY PRODUCT.
( applause )
( band begins playing
very lively melody )
( band plays final notes )
( song ends )
( applause )
"( choir sings ""Dayenu""
in Hebrew without
musical accompaniment )"
( band begins playing
'50s-style music )
( choir sings backup harmony )
( singing lead in
Hebrew in '50s style )
( saxophone solos )
( choir singing more upbeat
tempo with drum accompaniment )
( choir returns to fluid backup
with saxophone soloing )
( singing high melody )
( lead singer resumes song )
( soloing )
( song ends )
( applause and cheering )
THERE ARE A LOT OF STRONG
FEELINGS AND IDEAS
ASSOCIATED WITH PASSOVER.
IT'S EASY TO UNDERSTAND WHY.
THINK OF THE DRAMA OF THE STORY.
"HERE WAS YOUNG MOSES,
BROUGHT UP AS A PRINCE
IN PHARAOH'S COURT."
ONE DAY HE LEARNED
"THAT HE WAS, IN FACT, THE
SON OF A JEWISH SLAVE WOMAN."
WHEN HE CAME ACROSS
A CRUEL OVERSEER
"MISTREATING A JEWISH SLAVE,
HE COULDN'T IGNORE IT."
"ENRAGED, HE KILLED THE SLAVE
MASTER AND FLED FROM EGYPT."
"YEARS LATER, HE RETURNED,
FULL OF RIGHTEOUS ANGER"
AND DEMANDED THAT PHARAOH
RELEASE HIS PEOPLE--
THE JEWISH SLAVES--
FROM BONDAGE.
"""LET MY PEOPLE GO."""
BUT PHARAOH WOULDN'T LET THEM GO
UNTIL THE LORD PUNISHED EGYPT
WITH HORRIBLE PLAGUES:
"BLOOD, FROGS, LOCUSTS, BOILS"
"DISEASE, HAIL AND... DARKNESS."
"( orchestra begins playing
slow, somber melody )"
OVER ALL THE LAND.
IN THE DARKNESS
HIS LIGHT BE FAIR
AND IN DARKNESS
HE SENT A THICK DARKNESS
Men: A THICK DARKNESS...
Women: OVER ALL THE LAND...
Men: OVER ALL THE LAND.
All: IN DARKNESS
WHICH MIGHT BE FAIR
Men: A THICK DARKNESS...
Women: OVER ALL THE LAND...
All: DARKNESS
WHICH MIGHT BE FAIR
A THICK DARKNESS
A DARKNESS
OVER THE LAND
WHICH MIGHT BE FAIR
IN THE DARKNESS
WHICH MIGHT BE FAIR.
( orchestra plays final notes )
( applause )
OUT OF THAT DARKNESS
THE JEWISH PEOPLE FOUND
THE LIGHT OF FREEDOM.
"AT THE PASSOVER SEDER, WE
CELEBRATE THAT FREEDOM"
BUT WE'RE ALSO MINDFUL
OF THOSE WHO HAVEN'T BEEN LUCKY
ENOUGH TO TASTE ITS SWEETNESS.
MANY OF US SET ASIDE
A MOMENT IN THE SEDER
TO REMEMBER THOSE WHO
DID NOT ESCAPE OPPRESSION
AND TO PRAY FOR THOSE
WHO STILL ENDURE IT...
WHEREVER THEY MAY BE...
AND WHOEVER THEY MAY BE.
Bikel: ONE OF MY FAVORITE
SONGS ABOUT FREEDOM
WAS NOT WRITTEN
AS A PASSOVER SONG
BUT IT'S A SONG ABOUT FREEDOM--
"A SONG ABOUT A CALF,
BOUND FOR SLAUGHTER"
WHO SEES A SWALLOW
FLYING FREELY IN THE SKY.
AND THE FARMER TELLS
THE BLEATING CALF:
"""WHY ARE YOU BLEATING?"
"YOU COULD HAVE BEEN A BIRD,
YOU COULD HAVE BEEN FREE."""
( singing in Yiddish ):
"DONA, DONA, DONA, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DAI."
"DONA, DONA, DONA, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DAI."
CALVES ARE EASILY
BOUND AND SLAUGHTERED
NEVER KNOWING THE REASON WHY
BUT ALL THOSE WHO
CHERISH FREEDOM
LIKE THE SWALLOW
CAN LEARN TO FLY
HOW THE WINDS ARE LAUGHING
THEY LAUGH WITH ALL THEIR MIGHT
LAUGH AND LAUGH THE
WHOLE DAY THROUGH
AND HALF THE SUMMER'S NIGHT.
"DONA, DONA, DONA, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DAI-AI..."
"DONA, DONA, DONA, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONA, DONA, DAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DONAI"
"DONA, DONA, DONA..."
( trumpet echoes notes )
"DONA, DONA, DONAI, DAI."
( song ends )
"AT EVERY SEDER, WE OPEN THE
DOORS FOR ELIJAH THE PROPHET"
AND WE LEAVE A SPECIAL CUP OF
WINE FOR HIM ON THE SEDER TABLE.
"SOMEDAY, IT IS BELIEVED,
HE WILL RETURN TO EARTH"
AND PREPARE THE WAY FOR
THE GREAT AGE OF PEACE.
AS LONG AS PASSOVER
IS CELEBRATED
HOPE IS NEVER EXTINGUISHED.
"""ELIJAH THE PROPHET""--
""ELIYAHU HANOVI."""
( choir humming in harmony )
( singing in Hebrew )
( song ends )
( applause )
SOMETIMES IT HAS BEEN
ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE
TO KEEP THE FLAME
OF HOPE BURNING.
"AT TIMES, FATE HAS BROUGHT THE
JEWISH PEOPLE FACE TO FACE"
WITH WHAT SEEMED LIKE
INSURMOUNTABLE HARDSHIP.
BUT IT'S BEEN THE STRENGTH
HANDED FROM GENERATION
TO GENERATION
THROUGH TRADITIONS LIKE PASSOVER
THAT HAS ALLOWED US
TO OVERCOME ADVERSITY.
Siegel: ON THE FIRST
NIGHT OF PASSOVER
IN APRIL 1943
THE JEWS OF WARSAW GHETTO
ROSE UP AGAINST THE NAZIS.
"AND BEFORE LONG, BACK IN VILNA"
A POET BY THE NAME OF VIRSCH
GREIG HAD WRITTEN A HYMN
IN THEIR HONOR.
IT SOON BECAME THE ANTHEM OF ALL
THE EASTERN EUROPEAN PARTISANS.
EVEN IN THE CONCENTRATION
CAMPS THEY SANG IT.
AND BY THE END OF THE END
OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR
YIDDISH-SPEAKING JEWS
THE WORLD OVER SANG IT.
"WE SING IT AT OUR SEDER EVERY
YEAR-- ""ZOG NIT KEYNMOL"":"
"""NEVER SAY THAT YOU HAVE
REACHED THE VERY END"
"""THOUGH LEADEN SKIES A
BITTER FUTURE MAY PORTEND."
"""AND THE HOUR FOR WHICH
WE YEARN WILL YET ARRIVE"
"AND OUR MARCHING STEP WILL
THUNDER: WE SURVIVE!"""
"LIKE ANY ANTHEM, IT IS SUNG
AND LISTENED TO STANDING."
( singing in Yiddish ):
( band plays final chord )
AFTER 40 YEARS OF
WANDERING IN THE DESERT
THE JEWS WERE FINALLY ALLOWED
"TO ENTER THE PROMISED
LAND, ISRAEL."
THE PASSOVER STORY TEACHES
US TO CHERISH LIFE--
THAT WE SHOULD ALWAYS SAVOR
OUR TIME HERE ON EARTH
"AND ABOVE ALL, TO
TRY TO FIND EACH DAY"
THOSE SWEET MOMENTS FOR
WHICH WE SHOULD BE THANKFUL.
"THAT, FOR ME, IS PASSOVER."
AND NOW IT'S TIME
TO CLEAR THE DISHES
AND ENJOY MY FAVORITE
PART OF THE SEDER--
THE AFTER-DINNER SONGS
AND THE HYMNS OF PRAISE.
"YOU KNOW, MANY PEOPLE
SING HYMNS OF PRAISE"
TO CELEBRATE THEIR
ESCAPE FROM SLAVERY.
AND WE'RE LUCKY--
WE HAVE THE NEW ENGLAND
CONSERVATORY GOSPEL CHOIR
TO SING FOR US.
"""PITKHU LI SHAAREI TZEDEK""--"
"""OPEN UP THE GATES
OF RIGHTEOUSNESS"
"SO THAT WE MAY ENTER THEM."""
"( piano begins playing
intro to ""Pitkhu Li"" )"
( choir vocalizing softly )
( singing in Hebrew ):
( choir vocalizing melody )
( repeating song in Hebrew )
( song ends )
( applause )
"( playing intro
to ""Adhir Hu"" )"
( rhythmic drumming begins )
( rest of ensemble joins in )
( singing in Hebrew ):
( song ends )
( applause )
( tooting and honking )
( laughter )
"( kazoo playing ""Dayenu"" )"
( audience clapping to beat )
HEY!
( playing final note )
( applause and cheering )
"( playing swing-style
intro to ""Dayenu"" )"
( playing final note )
( applause )
DAYENU-- ENOUGH!
"WELL, FOR ME THERE ARE NEVER
ENOUGH TASTES OF PASSOVER."
THERE'S NEVER ENOUGH
TIME WITH FAMILY
AND CERTAINLY
NEVER ENOUGH MUSIC.
WE LEAVE YOU WITH ONE FINAL SONG
"WITHOUT WHICH NO PASSOVER WOULD
BE COMPLETE, ""KHAD GADYO"""
THE SONG ABOUT A LITTLE GOAT A
FATHER BOUGHT FOR TWO PENNIES.
I'M THEODORE BIKEL
AND FROM THE NEW ENGLAND
CONSERVATORY OF MUSIC IN BOSTON
"I WISH YOU A HAPPY PASSOVER, A
KUSHERN PESACH, CHAG SAMEACH."
GOOD NIGHT.
( singing a capella in Hebrew ):
( chorus repeating phrase )
( piano begins playing
lively melody )
( audience clapping to beat )
( singing final note )
( song ends )
[Captioned by The Caption Center
WGBH Educational Foundation]
"( band reprises ""Dayenu"" )"